>> A groundbreaking new study
suggests that commonly used
anti-inflammatory drugs
and steroids may cause pain
to become chronic.
Could this lead to
a dramatic paradigm
shift in how pain is
managed and prevented?
This is a Gaia News Breakdown.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For the vast majority
of people in acute pain,
taking an over-the-counter
anti-inflammatory,
such as ibuprofen, is the
usual course of action.
Inflammation has for decades
been seen as a cause of pain,
and its control the goal
of patients and doctors.
A new study suggests, however,
that inflammation may actually
be necessary to prevent
pain from becoming chronic.
Given today's
overwhelming prevalence
of chronic pain,
pain that persists
for more than three
months, scientists
have lately been
turning their focus
to studying the process by
which acute pain transitions
into more lasting and
debilitating pain.
Researchers at McGill
University recently
completed a study in which
they studied this process
using several methods.
First, they looked at
patients with lower
back and facial pain.
Upon analysis of their
immune cell samples,
the scientists were
surprised to find
that those whose pain resolved
showed an intense spike
in the activity of
inflammatory genes
during the acute pain stages,
which then rapidly diminished
within three months.
Researchers then
conducted an animal study
in which they treated mice
with various pain medications,
and found that
those who received
steroids or nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatories eventually
developed chronic pain,
while those treated
with other kinds of pain drugs,
such as lidocaine, did not.
Finally, the team examined data
from a large group of people,
and found that those who
took anti-inflammatories
had almost double the chance
of developing chronic pain
than those who took no
drugs or other drugs that
didn't suppress inflammation.
The findings strongly suggest
that our immune system's
natural inflammatory response
may help the body resolve pain,
and taking drugs that
suppress this natural process
does just the opposite.
An important note
is that researchers
believe that most
of the harm comes
from long-term use
of these drugs.
While some experts urge
caution in this interpretation
and are calling for
further clinical study,
many are heralding the
findings as groundbreaking.
Dr. Thomas Buchheit
of Duke University
told "The New York Times,"
quote, "This is absolutely
a paradigm shift.
There is this unspoken rule--
if it hurts, take an
anti-inflammatory.
And if it still hurts,
put a steroid on it."
But, he said, the study
shows that, quote,
"We have to think
of healing and not
suppression of inflammation."
Dr. Massimo Allegri,
lead author of the study,
told the American Association
for the Advancement of Science,
quote, "The biggest
clinical implication
is a complete reconsideration
of both prevention strategies
and treatments."
While further research
is forthcoming,
this study does seem to
provide convincing evidence
of the body's
innate intelligence
for healing, and the
importance of allowing it
to do so without interference.
For a new perspective, this
is a Gaia News Breakdown.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]